in the year 1700 I want to go to the
Moon how would you do that you don't
even have a periodic table of elements
yet how do you do that do you even know
what the moon is we all learn the
Pythagorean theorem just by looking at a
triangle and we're told that a squ plus
b s but if they were aliens they'd just
look at that and they maybe if they were
Cone Heads they'd like the idea that as
well or maybe they like Doritos and they
[Music]
this is Star Talk special edition which
means I got with me Gary O'Reilly Gary
hi Neil all right Chuck always good to
have you man always a pleasure be here
you guys invented this variant can I use
that word these days with viruses going
to say wow you just turned this into a
viral
infection you invented this variant of
special edition where you guys
apparently I didn't know this yes over
this this the years have collected
questions that had tap roots in previous
shows that you want to bring back to me
yeah so the things we get involved in
which is such a variety as much as it's
informational educational and
fascinating you kind of always seem to
come out of one with oh what if we asked
that oh okay so it's it's and you know
so we're trying to scratch this itch
okay to a certain extent now you've
mentioned variant I'm now scratching an
itch yeah there you go okay all all
right now I don't know if I'll have the
answers but I'll try okay well please
stop looking at me like that please do
you know listen you won't have an answer
an answer that's what good all right
there will be I'll kick us off okay
who's first go which direction do you
see human evolution taking in the future
do we stay biological head to a
transhuman existence or do we go totally
post-biological and just become this
super intelligent AI I think we will
resist just opinion mhm of course I
think we will resist merging technology
with our
biology neurologically I think we will
res there's a lot of spoken about this
disappointed I think we'll resist it I
think you're right because they say
let's put the whole internet on your
frontal lob I have the internet in the
palm of my hand without the surgery
required to open up my brain and stick
it there so I I'll take the 10 seconds
to find the information I need rather
than the instant information that would
otherwise be the case I want the chip I
have evidence of this what okay I'm
we're old enough he's not old enough but
you and I are old enough to watch planes
get ever faster over the decades from
the right Brothers up through the 50s
you did not the right Brothers
sorry I remember the right Brothers I'll
tell you I remember that day on Kitty
hwk never thought they'd get it off the
ground said to myself those boys are
wasting their time they need to go back
to building
bicycles was it all
Fields so uh what I'm saying is yes you
can ask the question why did we want
planes to go faster and faster because
we're impatient we're impatient and we W
reduce the time you in transit between
where you are and where you're going yes
okay then there's a point where planes
just didn't get faster in fact they're
going a little slower today than they
were in the early 1970s it's not
uncommon to you know cross state at 500
550 mph my day it was like 600 mph 650
okay so what's going on do you really
needed to get there an hour faster when
you have a thousand movies you can watch
you have access to the internet you can
sleep you can be plied with alcohol and
food do you really need to get there
fast my point is you're not getting any
of that on Spirit Airlines Spirit Ain
what's the know what you said is
happening on Spirit airlin sir so I'm
saying in that case the speed which
sounded like a good idea when you're
otherwise wasting your time on an
airplane getting from A to B the moment
you were no longer wasting your time in
fact you were being
productive the urge to fly
supersonic evaporated and so I'm saying
I have access to the internet you want
me to have 1 second access to the
internet or instant rather than 10
seconds I don't know that I'm going to
go there if I got to sit under a scalpel
and you poke into my brain so I think we
will resist that that's my opinion I
think you're right but I still want the
chip because first of all they're you
can barely see them and they can take
four of them and put them together and
just slide it in and unless elon's doing
it then I don't want it I do not want it
if Elon is doing
it we'll give you access to the internet
right but here's the reason why I want
the chip and I don't mean for me
personally I mean for for friend for for
mankind okay for all Man For All Mankind
there are certain responses that we have
that are neurochemical there are certain
things that we possess that are
detrimental to who we are as a species
and they are the wiring of our brain the
wiring of our brain that come out of
evolution yes so go in fix the wiring
but get your ass back out of my head but
my my think is that only the chip could
actually do that on an ongoing basis you
doesn't have to be ongoing if you know
exactly where the bad wiring is fix the
wiring and get the hell out of my head
so so if I have a phobia or a or what's
the one where you have you keep doing
something repeatedly obsessive
compulsive or a phobia you know one day
perhaps neuroscientists will know
exactly where that spot is in the head
go in there Nip Tuck snip snap reattach
bada bing we're good you no longer have
a phobia and you no longer have a
compulsion so that's all I'm saying I
think we will resist that that's all so
you're talking about improving mental
health what if we now get to the St
stage where we can improve our biology
and start to live that much longer and
then all of a sudden you've become
totally post-biological and you'll live
for eternity no no no we will figure out
how to manipulate the biology so that it
does not age but you're still biological
yeah but do you do you have that
transhuman part where you have to have
the chips and the bits and pieces and
the upgrades why would you need that if
we can fix your brain that's all I'm
saying but does the brain control every
single aspect
no okay there people with artificial
hips and knees and shoulders you know
Heads Shoulders Knees and Toes that's
why I say I don't see the difference I
think we will resist that next question
Chuck is it your turn okay here we go if
an unobstructed photon is traveling
towards the edge of the universe but the
universe is simultaneously expanding
which it is MHM and red shifting
increases the photon's
wavelength okay okay at some point
because from what I understand the
increase in the wavelength actually
reduces the energy of the photon at some
point does the photon just disappear if
it just keeps going and going and going
and going it red shifts to
Infinity so yeah what so so that that
happens at the Horizon of the universe
okay yeah so if we have a horizon where
at that place all the objects are
receding at the speed of light right
okay so when the photon sort of catches
up with that right at that point it has
red shifted to infinity and it's got
nothing for you it's got nothing for you
yeah wow so that's the it red shifts to
Infinity yeah yeah yeah sorry about
that's so
unsatisfying now you sound like that
Photon so uh as as part of the sort of
Star Talk group syc that we had Alex
bardis came up with one of our producers
yes one of our production team if you
could bend the laws of physics to your
will what would you change if anything
oh okay so in graduate school it's a
calculation you do MH where you look at
the gravitational constant which was
first proposed by Isaac Newton but it
would take centuries later to measure
its value reliably what is the
gravitational constant it's the thing
that's in the gravity equation that
tells you how to calculate how much
gravitational force you get from how
much mass so the force is proportional
to the mass how do you turn that into
equ an equation you have a what's called
a proportionality constant the
gravitational constant you don't know
this but you've been invoking that ever
since you recited the equation eal
mc^2 all that equation says is energy is
proportional to mass mhm how do you turn
that into an equation you need a
proportionality constant that's the c
squ the speed of light squared and so
all of these understandings of how the
universe works we have something on one
side of the equation something on the
other there's a constant there constant
of proportionality you make the
measurement okay so one of the
calculations we do is we take the
gravitational constant and say what
happens if we change it by a little
bit what are the consequences to the
universe it turns
out that you run the gravitational
constant through your equations of a
star and if you change the gravitational
constant by a little bit increase it by
a little bit MH it has stupendous
consequences on the Luminosity of stars
the Luminosity of a star is dependent on
the seventh
power of the value of the gravitational
constant so if I double the value of the
gravitational constant was 2 to the 7th
power okay 2 * 2 is 4 8 16 32 64 128 two
the Luminosity of stars would grow by a
factor of
256 thereby reducing their life
expectancy all this the universe would
be much brighter yes but they would burn
their energy faster and they wouldn't
last long enough for planets around them
to evolve into complex life it would be
devastating that's a lesson to us all
that if you want to mess with the
universe M you got to you know be
prepared be prepared for the
consequences F around and find
out now now that being said there's a
book series called Mr Tomkins in
Wonderland written by a physicist George
gamma the mid 20th century physicist
brilliant yeah brilliant guy uh he first
calculated that after the big bang you
would have a cosmic microwave background
okay made very important calculation
anyhow he wrote A series he wrote for
the public so he's after my own heart
here all right uh Mr Tomkins in
Wonderland in each of these books Mr
Tomkins was in a world where one of the
constants of nature was different so one
of them is the speed of light is 60 M
hour oh wow so he's driving down the
street in the dark and and and he sees
phenomenon that you would see only if
you went very fast near the speed of
light like in a normal situation but the
speed of light is not 60 M hour creative
very creative it's beautiful smart guy
yeah and another so one would be kind of
cool is is you know there's something
called
dispersion and it's defraction
dispersion refraction is what light does
as it goes through a a hole in the wall
or goes around a corner or goes into
another medium if you change the value
of planks constant yes that's the
constant for quantum physics there's a
value you can make it so that if you
walk through a
doorway you will
defract you it'll affect you macroscop
scopically in the way it previously only
affected particles and so I thought it'd
be fun to dial that up just so I can
live in the world of quantum physics
just for a day now that' be cool that's
what I'm saying that's all those rules
are different yeah a completely so I
would do that just as an amusement park
not as a thing right I I'm I'm not
messing with the laws of the universe
otherwise that's good news yeah good
thank you so our producer asked that
question yes okay and here's another
producer Lane we've learned on the show
that your position on human evolution is
that it was contingent on the extinction
of dinosaurs is our civilization
contingent on the formation of
hydrocarbons over millions of years did
the progression of human energy sources
require that we utilize fossil fuels
could we have gone from wood fire
straight to electricity o I think about
that all the time yeah I think about
could we have landed on the moon in the
year 1700 yeah for example
right okay why not okay so one of our
other producers Lindsay and I co-wrote a
book called to infinity and beyond where
we tracked what people were thinking in
their day and how far away was whatever
dream they had technologically
intellectually scientifically in the
year 1700 I want to go to the Moon how
would you do that you don't even have a
periodic table of elements yet how how
do you do that we will the material
science allow it is physics developed do
you have enough astronomy knowledge do
you even know what the moon is so I
think about that all the time did
everything have to happen in the way it
did
because many other factors have to come
together many other discoveries matter
at the same time so one cannot just run
off by itself no and they all build upon
each other they all build a sliding like
a sliding doors scenario where
everything has to happen or that moment
if you go through it see that's what I I
don't agree with that I agree that they
are definitely platformed where they
build on top of each other and they have
to be made so that that can be done but
I think it's a matter of human beings
have progressed and regressed and
progressed and regressed and if we had
just progressed m I think we might have
got to the Moon long before the 1700s
well you know because when you think
about it like we built the pyramids you
know I mean all right or at least aliens
built the pyramids you know we had
civilizations great civilizations but
then we always have war and that is the
regression slams us back to a place
before we started so we take one step
forward and three steps back or does it
let me read for you oh uhoh here we go
he's got his phone out let me read for
a passage written by Christian hens hen
Dutch polymath okay okay uh he he
discovered what Saturn's rings were oh
before him they were just like blob
Blobs of light right so this is a ring
system it's rotating exactly he's done a
lot of brilliant things I'll read to you
from his book Cosmo Theos Cosmo pheros
1898 oh okay the vices of men are no
hindrance to there being the glory of
the planet they inhabit and deeply Rel
all the scientists back then were
religious okay so it's folded in here
but watch how he says it besides the
vices of men themselves are of excellent
use these are the vices that you said
regress us okay are they not excellent
use and are not permitted and allowed in
the world without wise
design for since it has so pleased God
to order the Earth and everything in it
as we see it is for it's nonsense to say
it happened against his will or
knowledge we must not think that those
different opinions and that various
multiplicity of Minds were placed in
different men to no end or purpose but
that this mixture of bad men with good
and the consequence of such a mixture as
misfortunes Wars afflictions poverty and
the Alik were given to us for this very
good end for exercising our wits and
sharpening our inventions by forcing us
to provide for our own necessary defense
against our enemies Saturn not
withstanding that guy's an
idiot but he goes on talk about poverty
what role that plays but he's taking
kind of a fatalistic view it's a bit
more like his thing is kind of like you
know we're here because we're meant to
be and I I don't no no it's he's he's
right in a lot of ways here especially
since I wrote a whole book on this okay
accessory to war the unspoken Alliance
of astrophysics and the military what's
going on when we're at War Innovation
happens is the I don't want to die
driver the I don't want to die Gene and
I'm cool with that and well it's just
I'm just no I'm saying your book is
smarter than that guy because I'm
because
self-preservation will always outstrip
anything and he's saying he's saying
that you would only need self
preservations when you have a-holes
trying to not preserve you right when
a-holes try to kill you you you you kick
in high gear you kick in high gear so we
go from burning wood I don't see us
going to the Moon without a whole middle
piece there where our capacity to
generate energy gets greater Ander and
greater and there's a lot written about
consumption of energy in the historical
record where people say oh America is
use so much energy per capita and we
have to reduce that however again I'm
just observing this I'm not value
judging it the history of the world the
greatest civilizations the ones that
were most powerful however you measure
that were the ones that consumed the
energ per person per capita yeah you
can't rule the world unless you using up
a bunch of energy figure out how to
human capital chical energy
whatever so I think we needed ways to
develop enough energy in the system to
create elements of society that are high
consumers of energy like our
transportation system okay think about
that airplanes Rockets you don't have
that unless you command energy and
you're absolutely right my only caveat I
will say because I do not disagree with
anything you just said I don't
necessarily disagree with hen
Fen
but you're been desper okay but my
caveat is that if our chief goal were
one of
Enlightenment we would constantly be
seeking a higher level with or without
the threat of Destruction the threat of
War uh we would be training ourselves
and this is part of who we are as human
beings we'd be training ourselves to
constantly want to advance except I
think the urge to be enlightened is not
as strong as the urge to not die
absolutely I agree with that okay so my
point is if we cult if that were our
chief goal was to cultivate that we
would be able to burgeon that the
species would have to rethink itself
right okay and that's that's my point
that's such a bad thing because were we
to
Chase Enlightenment to innovate rather
than create a Thousand-Year War wouldn't
that serve Humanity better also when you
think about war think about this war is
very rarely a large sarth of a
population saying let's go do this it's
normally a few people making the
decision that a bunch of other people
are going to go and fight and die but
they're convincing you that they should
do that that's part of the problem here
he just goes on here says it the fear of
poverty and misery that we are beholden
for all our arts for that natural
knowledge which was the product of
laborious industry and which makes us
that we cannot but admire the power and
wisdom of the Creator again he's going
back to the Creator putting the bad
people and the bad things around us okay
which otherwise we might have passed by
with the same indifference as beasts and
if men were to lead their whole lives in
an undisturbed continued peace in no
fear of poverty no danger of War I don't
doubt they would live little better than
the than brutes without all knowledge or
enjoyment of these advantages that made
our lives pass on with pleasure and
profit I'm just saying I disagree with
that yeah he's saying we'll be we're
we're complacent because we have it all
that's basically if if it wer for
a-holes up God put a-holes under so
everyone else can make life better
basically's saying God gives you lemons
make
lemonade yes and that's that's the best
invention of God there ever was lemonade
right okay so why we discuss got give me
another question all right why will we
discussing energies yes data centers AI
plus bitco Bitcoin mining MH energy
consumption yes it's huge I mean this is
not just a single nation this is a
global phon so how are they going to be
powered in the future is the answer
nuclear is it solar is it wind is it
burn more wood burn more gas burn more
oil there's no shortage of energy I know
but these guys they can't keep burning
up energy like a a small nation just I
want to be clear there some who walk
among us who want to demonize the
consumption of energy and I'm saying
fine on the assumption that the
energy you're demonizing mhm that the
production or utility of that
energy somehow badly affects the
environment but solar power wind power
hydroelectric there's there's no
shortage of other ways to generate as
much energy as you want you drive
through the southwest of the United
States the Sahara any Desert mhm there
are no solar panels there there's just
sand there's not even plants there's
just sand that gets hot and radiates the
sun's energy at night not serving
anybody at all I'm saying if you're
going to need energy to mine Bitcoin or
whatever else you there are ways to
produce energy that doesn't mess up the
environment and I don't care how much
energy it is because we're get more
energy than we'll ever use coming down
every second from the Sun and believe it
or not there's energy beneath us all you
got to do is drill a hole down and you
can actually pull energy from the Earth
itself just Iceland they have tubes on
the mountain side that go down into the
I say the lava into the very hot layers
beneath the crust okay they cycle water
down there it gets hot bring it back
bring it back up and they send the water
down into town they actually have to
cool down the water before it gets to
your shower because you get scalded
right okay but we're going to produce
massive data centers I I don't care and
they're going to need energy fine and we
have it I mean Neil's saying we have the
all the energy that we need correct and
I've been saying this for years I don't
care what anybody says okay and or just
n use nukes the sun itself is enough
energy for any and everything we need I
don't care what anybody has told you
just because we haven't made the
necessary strides to harness that power
doesn't mean that that power is not
available yeah nor does it mean that we
shouldn't think of using things that
invoke a lot of I don't have a problem
with energy exactly no issues this is
what I'll say and if you nukes you would
want to use Fusion not fision fion has
byproducts you have disp the on the new
newer ones coming out sort of like a
modular smaller the direction we want to
take that in the future is Fusion where
there's no uh no unpleasant byproducts
yeah that would be good yeah just
turning hydrogen into helium helium
that's all that happen there yeah so
Chuck next okay here we go in wave of
particle
duality we know that photons can kick
out electrons showing that they are both
particles
right we also know that the Double Split
experiment shows that electrons create
wave interference that interferes with
itself so it's a wave okay so electrons
are waves and particles just like
photons but anybody who's ever used a
battery knows how we use
electrons for you know anything uh as a
particle all right how do we use
electrons as a wave is there anything we
do that says we take the wave part of
the electron and we use that instead of
the
particle what or or as a particle yes
yes yes yes yes okay okay is that the
answer is that
it all right all right uh so uh let me
take a back door into your question okay
all right so imagine a wave right like
has an up and a down and a we call that
a sin but it's up and down from aine
wave all right I had a sinusoid
infection once it was
terrible all right so that's a wave so
if you're using light that has this
wavelength and you want to take a photo
of anything that has detail that's
smaller than that wavelength you ain't
getting it right okay yes that light of
this wavelength cannot resolve any
detail smaller than its own wavelength
okay gotcha that makes sense that makes
sense okay right so how do electron
microscopes
work ah okay well let's look at
wavelength we get in order of reducing
wavelengths red orange yellow green
blue
violet let's make the wavelength smaller
then we get what the other side of
violet
indigo no x-rays right or Gamma or
something other side of violet it's
beyond Violet ultraviolet
Ultra dude gosh sorry D who's co-host
are you right so red orange yellow green
blue violet ultra violet okay what comes
after ultraviolet x-rays x-rays okay
really small wavelength okay okay more
energy smaller wavelength yes not only
is it higher energy smaller wavelength
but if you use that light to take photos
you can see things
really tiny in so what you do is you
heat up electrons until their wave
equivalent is x-rays oh snap and then
you beam the electrons to the and then
you can take pictures of of of the stuff
is at that the hairs on the edges of
insects and so that's why they call it
an electron microscope that's why
because the wave particle duality is
being exploited for that technology for
that technology yes I didn't realize so
that you I you heat up the
electrons you sight them to the point
where they get to that wavelength yes
that's their wavelength they have the
energy level where that their
corresponding energy is x-rays you beam
it in who the hell thought that's
brilliant this is
science that's amazing that's why any
electron microscope you've ever seen in
any book that's some detailed stuff
you've seen it like bugs and and and and
cell fibers and things right scary
Little Critters I know aren't they and
and and that doesn't work with visible
light exactly the wavelength is too
large that's great yeah okay well there
you go that's an example and no that's a
great example all right ready for the
next one next one okay so these are good
questions you're all good good people
doing our best reason we haven't
encountered alien life forms now is
maybe that these alien life forms are
billions and billions of years old and
have gone from a biological to an
artificial intelligence and are living
for eternity and therefore we can't see
touch feel is that likely as a
possibility why wouldn't you be able to
see touch or feel something just because
it lives for eternity no no if it's if
it's gone to an artificial intelligence
and exists in a virtual capacity if I'm
thinking it correctly so in using our
feeble 21st century vocabulary yes
you're saying it might exist in
some uh computer State some memory State
mhm and it's just happy existing on its
own Planet forever so and that's why we
haven't had any so it's living in its
own Matrix where it wants to go to the
beach it goes to the beach what what's
that movie Total Recall okay everybody's
just living there and they're just
machines humming okay by the way that
was a recurring theme in the Netflix
series Black
Mirror I consciousnesses have been up
into just this Bank of computer who was
the British guy that was behind all of
that I forget his name oh heavens above
anyway moving on he's brilliant so I'm
just wondering you know if a
civilization a race an alien life form
has been in existence over bli billions
and billions of years surely it's
evolved into something absolutely super
they've learned to ditch their biology
yeah and and pick on so we could visit a
planet where it's just these
humming data centers and that's where
millions of people are living out their
lives H such as in The Matrix uh okay
it's plausible okay all right I'll keep
an eye out for humming data centers but
I wonder how would it ever make a
discovery yeah at that point I'm saying
because I still get to go to the beach
and pour over the shells and rocks and I
might discover a life form that my
Consciousness in the Box will never know
see or even think well if they're really
super intelligent they'll probably
worked a way out I don't know how that
would be if they're not the ones doing
the discovery we're doing 21st century
thinking and they're
okay what they would do they'd have to
have some version of itself that's still
exploring right yeah out there so then
we might see their Hardware
Emissary interesting CU that's most
likely what we'll do once we leave we
and by the way why wouldn't they want to
leave and go too cuz if you're not bound
by the Caporal then you can now get into
a ship Bound by the Caporal I know I
heard that and I liked it keep by theal
well done sir okay yes well done well
you can get into a ship and still be
Tethered to your planet there still be
on the ship too and then say let's go uh
both places let's go both places let's
go to a black hole let's see what the
Event Horizon is and you're still on
fall into and you're still back on the
let's fall into this blackle and that
part of you dies but you're still that
part is right okay I like this this is
good yeah I mean that's if if I could
put myself into a con that's what I
would that's the only reason I would
want to keep living didn't have probes
that went beyond their Planet yeah they
would be aifi in the moment that they
stopped doing that this is what I would
claim see that sounds like hell to
me could you imagine being stuck in 2024
for eternity well if you go far enough
back when civilization didn't change by
very much you'd live your whole life
with no expectation of living
differently tomorrow than you did today
damn wow whereas today everybody expects
tomorrow is going to be different that's
true okay so back then if far as they're
concerned all of eternity would be like
that doesn't everybody think tomorrow is
going to be worse you know
what that makes a lot of sense why
people want to go to heaven because if
you if your life changes very little you
need some escape from that you right and
it's like okay if life is changing daily
you got something to look forward to see
the Myster is something to look forward
you want you want the pot of gold yes
exactly wow as Pat Oswell says they want
sky
cake I'm sorry it's the best description
of Heaven I've ever heard SK I don't
care about my life down here when I die
heard this sky cake I've heard that
routine hilarious hilarious I'm sorry
anyway go uh let's go to Alex P here we
go you said that there is a time when we
will achieve exit velocity from Death
staying on the Gary stee how does the
notion of human morality gel with the
concept of entropy oo look at that do
the laws of thermodynamics forbid humans
from ever living forever yes you would
never live forever if you were a closed
system entropy would take its toll right
but life on Earth is not a closed system
no it isn't it is open to energy sources
Beyond itself it's called the sun okay
it's that simple this is one of the
early attempts to out argue the physics
by fundament creationist they would say
well you say things always Decay to
disorder by the second law of
Thermodynamics and look at us we are
more complex than ever before and it's
just you should pause before you try to
argue physics with a physicist if your
foundational knowledge is from a book
written 4,000 years ago you just have to
pause for a moment okay the entropy
issue takes place only in closed systems
right okay we have a three species
sphere downstairs living in a vat of
water that is completely sealed we have
kelp we have Krill and we have snails
and they have been living off each other
for 25 years since January 1st 2000
that's 25 years ago we've had they've
been kicking it downstairs okay one of
them eats the poop of the other
okay symbiosis okay so yes they're
symbiotically uh entangled entangled now
watch when the construction was
happening mhm the construction folks
said well this looks pretty important
and fragile let's protect it oh they put
and they put a tarp over
it that's great when Good Deeds go wrong
oh and so we caught it early but you
know a couple of Belly Up Krill of
course but basically they thought that
this was its own thing its own world it
kind of looks that way because it's a
sealed sphere all right it's not its own
world it requires energy from the
outside just as we do here on Earth so
if you want to live forever you will do
so at the expense of some energy
somewhere else on your planet or in the
solar system cool if you want to live
forever don't let anyone put a top over
you
that's the lesson of the day yes and
maybe don't let him do that in any case
that's
great I one more question time for one
more all right science fiction sometimes
has stories of humans interacting with
aliens and trying to find a universal
commonality from mathematics or the laws
of physics to bridge the inevitable
communication gap that would arise
between two massively different cultures
are there any good examples of this you
haven't heard in fiction or any that
were you were impressed
by the authors that they came up with
this question from Brian yes I I have an
example Brian Our IT specialist Our IT
guy okay and I got this very good
forgive me for not remembering on the
spot who came up with this but it was
not a science fiction author it was like
a
philosopher physicist mathematician okay
so he said here's what you do you want
to communicate with aliens and you want
them to know that we are smart okay you
just make a triangle
okay as big as you can on
Earth okay all right then you make a
square off of each side of the
triangle
right okay and the triangle has side A B
C these are really crappy squares there
okay I'm not judging there you have it
now you you make channels here with like
fuel or something and ignite it when
Earth is at night mhm alien will see
this and say we got some smart people
down there do you know why okay what is
the area of a
square well it depends on the size of
the square no no if a square of side C
what's the
area it's uh I'm trying to remember my
stupid job well the area of a rectangle
is
what it's oh God it's height times the w
that's right Square say side one side
two time side two okay so in a square
it's so this C was the same as there so
the area of this square is C * c c * c c
c squ you got that okay all right what's
the area of this oh my God a a a square
plus b square equal C Square what's the
area of this Square what's the area of
this Square that's a squ a squ yeah okay
a squ and the area of this one
squ yeah
okay if you draw this it means you know
about the Pythagorean the there you go
so that the squares of the sides of a
triangle are not just an abstract
concept they're actual squares that's
crazy okay you light this on fire at
night the aliens will know you've been
hanging out with Pythagoras only if the
aliens studied
geometry oh my God wouldn't it be funny
if we got some dumbass alien
I failed I failed geometry man I told
you it was going to come in handy at
some point you you said math didn't make
a difference after
school so I'm saying we all learn the
Pythagorean theorem just by looking at a
triangle and we're told that a squ plus
b s but if they were aliens they just
look at that and they maybe if they were
Cone Heads they'd like the idea that it
was a triangle that as well or maybe
they like Doritos and there
there you go okay so as a kid I the
first Science Museum I ever attended was
the Boston Museum of Science and then a
lot of Hands-On exhibits as good science
museums will cool and they had this on
the wall oh and you know what it was so
you would rotate it so it would be
sitting there like this and it'd be this
flat squares against the wall and this
had liquid in it just a a thin Square
volume okay this had oh that's brilliant
and so when you it it you turn it this
liquid fills the other two squares and
this then filled completely these other
two squares say a square plus b square
cool man that's a great exhibit that's
some good yeah that's some
brilliant Educators thinking about it is
that's very good and so I was just duly
reminded by by our producer Alex P that
gaus brilliant German mathematician
obviously proposed this as a way to
possibly to show aliens that we're not
still living in the caves yeah because
it's so intentional that's amazing yes
yeah and so simply simp that's why
that's the genius you're not going to
say you're not going to write an English
sentence or even some other symbols
might throw people off we can throw a
best equation but they might have other
symbols for equations make difference
whereas a triangle and a square they get
it we got it wow look at that okay all
right your Brian this has been Chuck and
Gary's burning questions Star Talk
Special Edition thank you I enjoy that
we should do that more that was fun
maybe you can ask us some next time
maybe yeah I I will the answers will be
interesting all right we're done here
Star Talk special edition Neil the grass
Tyson thanks Chuck Gary you're welcome
Gary Chuck same thing until next time
keep looking up
[Music]